He spoke thus, and as he wept the father took pity upon him
and bent his head, that the people should stay alive, and not perish.
Straightway he sent down the most lordly of birds, an eagle,
with a fawn, the young of the running deer, caught in his talons,
who cast down the fawn beside Zeus' splendid altar
where the Achaians wrought their devotions to Zeus of the Voices.
They, when they saw the bird and knew it was Zeus who sent it,
remembered once again their warcraft, and turned on the Trojans.
Then, many as the Danaans were, there was no man among them
could claim he held his fast horses ahead of the son of Tydeus
to drive them once more across the ditch and fight at close quarters,
but he was far the first to kill a chief man of the Trojans,
Phradmon's son, Agelaos, as he turned his team to escape him.
For in his back even as he was turning the spear fixed
between the shoulders and was driven on through the chest beyond it.
He fell from the chariot, and his armour clattered upon him.
After him came the Atreidai, Menelaos and Agamemnon,
and the two Aiantes gathering their fierce strength about them,
and with them Idomeneus and Idomeneus' companion
Meriones, a match for the murderous lord of battles,
and after these Eurypylos, the glorious son of Euaimon;
and ninth came Teukros, bending into position the curved bow,
and took his place in the shelter of Telamonian Aias'
shield, as Aias lifted the shield to take him. The hero
would watch, whenever in the throng he had struck some man with an arrow,
and as the man dropped and died where he was stricken, the archer
would run back again, like a child to the arms of his mother,
to Aias, who would hide him in the glittering shield's protection.
Then which of the Trojans first did Teukros the blameless strike down?
Orsilochos first of all, and Ormenos, and Ophelestes,
Daitor and Chromios, and Lykophontes the godlike,
and Amopaon, Polyaimon's son, and Melanippos.
All these he felled to the bountiful earth in close succession.
Agamemnon the lord of men was glad as he watched him
laying waste from the strong bow the Trojan battalions;
he went over and stood beside him and spoke a word to him: