So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
They fell upon the Trojans in a pack, and about them
the ships echoed terribly to the roaring Achaians.
But the Trojans, when they saw the powerful son of Menoitios
himself and his henchman with him in the glare of their war gear,
the heart was stirred in all of them, the battalions were shaken
in the expectation that by the ships swift-footed Peleion
had thrown away his anger and chosen the way of friendship.
Then each man looked about him for a way to escape the sheer death.
Patroklos was the first man to make a cast with the shining
spear, straight through the middle fighting, where most men were stricken,
beside the stern on the ship of great-hearted Protesilaos,
and struck Pyraichmes, who had led the lords of Paionian
horses from Amydon and the wide waters of Axios.
He struck him in the right shoulder, so he dropped in the dust groaning,
on his back, and his Paionian companions about him
scattered; for Patroklos drove the fear into all of them
when he cut down their leader, the best of them all in battle.
He drove them from the ships and put out the fire that was blazing,
and that ship was left half-burnt as it was, as the Trojans scattered
in terror and unearthly noise, and the Danaans streamed back
along the hollow ships, and clamour incessant rose up.
And as when from the towering height of a great mountain Zeus
who gathers the thunderflash stirs the cloud dense upon it,
and all the high places of the hills are clear and the shoulders out-jutting
and the deep ravines, as endless bright air spills from the heavens,
so when the Danaans had beaten from their ships the ravening
fire, they got breath for a little, but there was no check in the fighting;
for the Trojans under the attack of the warlike Achaians
had not yet turned their faces to run away from the black ships.
They stood yet against them, but gave way from the ships under pressure.
There man killed man all along the scattered encounter
of the leaders, and first among them, the strong son of Menoitios,
threw and struck Areïlykos in the thigh, as he turned
back, with the sharp point of the spear, and drove the bronze clean through.
The spear smashed in the bone and he fell to the ground headlong
on his face. Meanwhile warlike Menelaos stabbed Thoas
in the chest where it was left bare by the shield, and unstrung his limbs' strength.
Meges, Phyleus' son, watched Amphiklos as he came on
and was too quick with a stab at the base of the leg, where the muscle
of a man grows thickest, so that on the spearhead the sinew
was torn apart, and a mist of darkness closed over both eyes.
Of the sons of Nestor one, Antilochos, stabbed Atymnios
with the sharp spear, and drove the bronze head clean through his flank, so
that he fell forward; but Maris with the spear from close up
made a lunge at Antilochos in rage for his brother
standing in front of the corpse, but before him godlike Thrasymedes
was in with a thrust before he could stab, nor missed his quick stroke
into the shoulder, and the spearhead shore off the arm's base
clear away from the muscles and torn from the bone utterly.
He fell, thunderously, and darkness closed over both eyes.
So these two, beaten down under the hands of two brothers,
descended to the dark place, Sarpedon's noble companions
and spear-throwing sons of Amisodaros, the one who had nourished
the furious Chimaira to be an evil to many.
Aias, Oïleus' son, in an outrush caught Kleoboulos
alive, where he was fouled in the running confusion, and there
unstrung his strength, hewing with the hilted sword at the neck,
so all the sword was smoking with blood and over both eyes
closed the red death and the strong destiny. Then Peneleos
and Lykon ran up close together, since these with their spear-throws
had gone wide of each other, and each had made a cast vainly.
So now the two of them ran together with swords. There Lykon
hacked at the horn of the horse-hair crested helm, but the sword blade
broke at the socket; Peneleos cut at the neck underneath
the ear, and the sword sank clean inside, with only skin left
to hold it, and the head slumped aside, and the limbs were loosened.
Meriones on his light feet overtaking Akamas
stabbed him in the right shoulder as he climbed up behind his horses
and the darkness drifted over his eyes as he crashed from the chariot.
Idomeneus stabbed Erymas in the mouth with the pitiless
bronze, so that the brazen spearhead smashed its way clean through
below the brain in an upward stroke, and the white bones splintered,
and the teeth were shaken out with the stroke and both eyes filled up
with blood, and gaping he blew a spray of blood through the nostrils
and through his mouth, and death in a dark mist closed in about him.
So these lords of the Danaans killed each his own man.
They as wolves make havoc among lambs or young goats in their fury,
catching them out of the flocks, when the sheep separate in the mountains
through the thoughtlessness of the shepherd, and the wolves seeing them
suddenly snatch them away, and they have no heart for fighting;
so the Danaans ravaged the Trojans, and these remembered
the bitter sound of terror, and forgot their furious valour.
But the great Aias was trying forever to make a spearcast
at bronze-helmed Hektor, but he in his experience of fighting
with his broad shoulders huddled under the bull's-hide shield kept
watching always the whistle of arrows, the crash of spears thrown.
He knew well how the strength of the fighting shifted against him,
but even so stood his ground to save his steadfast companions.
As when a cloud goes deep into the sky from Olympos
through the bright upper air when Zeus brings on the hurricane,
so rose from beside the ships their outcry, the noise of their terror.
In no good order they went back, while his fast-running horses
carried Hektor away in his armour; he abandoned the people
of the Trojans, who were trapped by the deep-dug ditch unwilling,
and in the ditch many fast horses who pulled the chariots
left, broken short at the joining of the pole, their masters' chariots
while Patroklos was on them, calling hard and loud to the Danaans
with evil intention for the Trojans, who, in clamorous terror,
choked all the ways where they were cut off; from under their feet stirred
the dust-storm scattered in clouds, their single-foot horses were straining
to get back to the city away from the ships and the shelters.
But Patroklos, where he saw the stirring of most people,
steered there, shouting, and men went down under the axles
headlong from chariots as the empty cars rattled onward.
Straight across the ditch overleapt those swift and immortal
horses the gods had given as shining gifts to Peleus,
hurtling onward, as Patroklos' rage stirred him against Hektor,
whom he tried to strike, but his fast horses carried him out of it.
As underneath the hurricane all the black earth is burdened
on an autumn day, when Zeus sends down the most violent waters
in deep rage against mortals after they stir him to anger
because in violent assembly they pass decrees that are crooked,
and drive righteousness from among them and care nothing for what the gods think,
and all the rivers of these men swell current to full spate
and in the ravines of their water-courses rip all the hillsides
and dash whirling in huge noise down to the blue sea, out of
the mountains headlong, so that the works of men are diminished;
so huge rose the noise from the horses of Troy in their running.
But Patroklos, when he had cut away their first battalions,
turned back to pin them against the ships, and would not allow them
to climb back into their city though they strained for it, but sweeping
through the space between the ships, the high wall, and the river,
made havoc and exacted from them the blood price for many.
There first of all he struck with the shining spear Pronoös
in the chest where it was left bare by the shield, and unstrung his limbs' strength.
He fell, thunderously, and Patroklos in his next outrush
at Thestor, Enops' son, who huddled inside his chariot,
shrunk back, he had lost all his nerve, and from his hands the reins
slipped--Patroklos coming close up to him stabbed with a spear-thrust
at the right side of the jaw and drove it on through the teeth, then
hooked and dragged him with the spear over the rail, as a fisherman
who sits out on the jut of a rock with line and glittering
bronze hook drags a fish, who is thus doomed, out of the water.
So he hauled him, mouth open to the bright spear, out of the chariot,
and shoved him over on his face, and as he fell the life left him.
Next he struck Erylaos, as he swept in, with a great stone
in the middle of the head, and all the head broke into two pieces
inside the heavy helmet, and he in the dust face downward
dropped while death breaking the spirit drifted about him.
Afterwards with Erymas, Amphoteros, and Epaltes,
Tlepolemos Damastor's son, Echios and Pyris,
Ipheus and Euippos, and Argeas' son Polymelos,
all these he felled to the bountiful earth in rapid succession.
But Sarpedon, when he saw his free-girt companions going
down underneath the hands of Menoitios' son Patroklos,
called aloud in entreaty upon the godlike Lykians: