So Menelaos the blameless spoke, and stripping the bloody
armour away from his body gave it to his companions,
and turned back himself to merge in the ranks of the champions.
Now there sprang forth against him the son of King Pylaimenes,
Harpalion, who had followed his father into the fighting
at Troy, and did not come home again to the land of his fathers.
He from close up stabbed with his spear at the shield of Atreides
in the middle, but could not drive the bronze all the way through it.
To avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions,
looking all about him, for fear somebody might wound him with the bronze;
but as he went back Meriones let fly at him with a bronze-shod
arrow, and hit him beside the right buttock, so that the arrow
was driven on through under the bone to fix in the bladder.
There, sitting among the arms of his beloved companions,
he gasped out his life, then lay like a worm extended
along the ground, and his dark blood drenched the ground in its running.
And the great-hearted Paphlagonians busied about him,
lifted him into a chariot and brought him to sacred Ilion
in sorrow, and his father, weeping tears, walked beside them,
and no man-price came his way for his son's slaying.
But Paris was deeply angered at heart for this man's slaying,
since he was his guest friend among many Paphlagonians,
and in anger for him he also let fly a bronze-shod arrow.
There was a man, Euchenor, son of the seer Polyidos,
a rich man and good, who lived in his house at Korinth,
who knew well that it was his death when he went on shipboard,
since many times the good old man Polyidos had told him
that he must die in his own house of a painful sickness
or go with the ships of the Achaians and be killed by the Trojans.
He therefore chose to avoid the troublesome price the Achaians
would ask, and the hateful sickness so his heart might not be afflicted.
Paris struck him by jaw and ear, and at once the life spirit
fled from his limbs, and the hateful darkness closed in about him.
So they fought on in the likeness of blazing fire. But meanwhile
Hektor beloved of Zeus had not heard of this, and knew nothing
of how to the left of the ships his people were being slaughtered
by the Argives, and glory for the Achaians might even have been
accomplished, such was Poseidon who circles the earth and shakes it
as he stirred on the Argives and fought for them and his own strength.
But Hektor held where first he had broken a way through the rampart
and the gates, and shattered the close ranks of the armoured Danaans,
where lay the ships of Aias and the ships of Protesilaos
hauled up along the beach of the grey sea; and above these
the wall they had built lay lowest, and there beyond other places
dangerous was the onslaught of the Trojans and of their horses.
There the Boiotians, and Ionians with their trailing tunics,
the Lokrians and the Phthians, with the shining Epeians
tried to hold him as he swept hard for the ships, but they could not
avail to beat brilliant flame-like Hektor back from them.
There also were the chosen Athenian men, and among them
Peteos' son Menestheus was lord, and there followed with him
Pheidas and Stichios and strong Bias; but the Epeians
were led by Meges, Phyleus' son, Amphion and Drakios,
and before the Phthians were Medon and battle-stubborn Podarkes.
Now of these one, Medon, was bastard son of O誰leus
the godlike, and brother of Aias, yet he was living away from
the land of his fathers, in Phylake, since he had killed a man,
the brother of Eriopis, his stepmother and wife of O誰leus;
but the other was son of Iphiklos, the son of Phylakos.
And these in arms at the forefront of the great-hearted Phthians
fought beside the Boiotians in defence of their vessels.
But swift Aias the son of O誰leus would not at all now
take his stand apart from Telamonian Aias,
not even a little; but as two wine-coloured oxen straining
with even force drag the compacted plough through the fallow land,
and for both of them at the base of the horns the dense sweat gushes;
only the width of the polished yoke keeps a space between them
as they toil down the furrow till the share cuts the edge of the ploughland;
so these took their stand in battle, close to each other.
Now with the son of Telamon many people and brave ones
followed as companions, and took over the great shield from him
whenever the sweat and the weariness came over his body.
But no Lokrians went with the great-hearted son of O誰leus.
The heart was not in them to endure close-standing combat,
for they did not have the brazen helmets crested with horse-hair,
they did not have the strong-circled shields and the ash spears,
but rather these had followed to Ilion with all their confidence
in their bows and slings strong-twisted of wool; and with these
they shot their close volleys and broke the Trojan battalions.
So now these others fought in front in elaborate war gear
against the Trojans and Hektor the brazen-helmed, and the Lokrians
unseen volleyed from behind, so the Trojans remembered
nothing of the joy of battle, since the shafts struck them to confusion.
Now pitifully the Trojans might have gone back from the shelters
and the ships, to windy Ilion, had not Poulydamas
come and stood beside bold Hektor and spoken a word to him: