So speaking, he hastened back but stirred Antilochos onward,
and he sprang forth from the champions and hefted the shining javelin,
glaring round about him, and the Trojans gave way in the face
of the man throwing with the spear. And he made no vain cast
but struck Hiketaon's son, Melanippos the high-hearted,
in the chest next to the nipple as he swept into the fighting.
He fell, thunderously, and darkness closed over both eyes.
Antilochos sprang forth against him, as a hound rushes
against a stricken fawn that as he broke from his covert
a hunter has shot at, and hit, and broken his limbs' strength.
So Antilochos stubborn in battle sprang, Melanippos,
at you, to strip your armour, but did not escape brilliant Hektor's
notice, who came on the run through the fighting against him.
Antilochos did not hold his ground, although a swift fighter,
but fled away like a wild beast who has done some bad thing,
one who has killed a hound or an ox-herd tending his cattle
and escapes, before a gang of men has assembled against him;
so Nestor's son ran away, and after him the Trojans and Hektor
with unearthly clamour showered their groaning weapons against him.
He turned and stood when he got into the swarm of his own companions.
But the Trojans in the likeness of ravening lions swept on
against the ships, and were bringing to accomplishment Zeus' orders,
who wakened always the huge strength in them, dazed the courage
of the Argives, and denied their glory, and stirred on the others.
Zeus' desire was to give glory to the son of Priam,
Hektor, that he might throw on the curved ships the inhuman
weariless strength of fire, and so make completely accomplished
the prayer of Thetis. Therefore Zeus of the counsels waited
the sight before his eyes of the flare, when a single ship burned.
From thereon he would make the attack of the Trojans
surge back again from the ships, and give the Danaans glory.
With this in mind he drove on against the hollow ships Hektor,
Priam's son, though Hektor without the god was in fury
and raged, as when destructive fire or spear-shaking Ares
rages among the mountains and dense places of the deep forest.
A slaver came out around his mouth, and under the lowering
brows his eyes were glittering, the helm on his temples
was shaken and thundered horribly to the fighting of Hektor.
Out of the bright sky Zeus himself was working to help him
and among men so numerous he honoured this one man
and glorified him, since Hektor was to have only a short life
and already the day of his death was being driven upon him
by Pallas Athene through the strength of Achilleus. And now
he was probing the ranks of men, and trying to smash them,
and made for where there were most men together, and the best armour.
But even so he could not break them, for all his fury,
for they closed into a wall and held him, like some towering
huge sea-cliff that lies close along the grey salt water
and stands up against the screaming winds and their sudden directions
and against the waves that grow to bigness and burst up against it.
So the Danaans stood steady against the Trojans, nor gave way.
But he, lit about with flame on all sides, charged on their numbers
and descended upon them as descends on a fast ship the battering
wave storm-bred from beneath the clouds, and the ship goes utterly
hidden under the foam, and the dangerous blast of the hurricane
thunders against the sail, and the hearts of the seamen are shaken
with fear, as they are carried only a little way out of death's reach.
So the heart in the breast of each Achaian was troubled.
Hektor came on against them, as a murderous lion on cattle
who in the low-lying meadow of a great marsh pasture
by hundreds, and among them a herdsman who does not quite know
how to fight a wild beast off from killing a horn-curved
ox, and keeps pace with the first and the last of the cattle
always, but the lion making his spring at the middle
eats an ox as the rest stampede; so now the Achaians
fled in unearthly terror before father Zeus and Hektor,
all, but he got one only, Periphetes of Mykenai,
beloved son of Kopreus, who for the lord Eurystheus
had gone often with messages to powerful Herakles.
To him, a meaner father, was born a son who was better
for all talents, in the speed of his feet and in battle
and for intelligence counted among the first in Mykenai.
Thereby now higher was the glory he granted to Hektor.
For as he whirled about to get back, he fell over the out-rim
of the shield he carried, which reached to his feet to keep the spears from him.
Stumbling on this he went over on his back, and the helmet
that circled his temples clashed horribly as he went down.
Hektor saw it sharply, and ran up and stood beside him,
and stuck the spear into his chest and killed him before the eyes
of his dear friends, who for all their sorrowing could do nothing
to help their companion, being themselves afraid of great Hektor.
Now they had got among the ships, and the ends were about them
of the ships hauled up in the first line, but the Trojans swarmed
on them. The Argives under force gave back from the first line
of their ships, but along the actual shelters they rallied
in a group, and did not scatter along the encampment. Shame held them
and fear. They kept up a continuous call to each other,
and beyond others Gerenian Nestor, the Achaians' watcher,
supplicated each man by the knees for the sake of his parents.