So spoke the son of Kronos and woke the incessant battle,
and the gods went down to enter the fighting, with purposes opposed.
Hera went to the assembled ships with Pallas Athene
and with Poseidon who embraces the earth, and with generous
Hermes, who within the heart is armed with astute thoughts.
Hephaistos went the way of these in the pride of his great strength
limping, and yet his shrunken legs moved lightly beneath him.
But Ares of the shining helm went over to the Trojans,
and with him Phoibos of the unshorn hair, and the lady of arrows
Artemis, and smiling Aphrodite, Leto, and Xanthos.
Now in the time when the gods were still distant from the mortals,
so long the Achaians were winning great glory, since now Achilleus
showed among them, who had stayed too long from the sorrowful fighting.
But the Trojans were taken every man in the knees with trembling
and terror, as they looked on the swift-footed son of Peleus
shining in all his armour, a man like the murderous war god.
But after the Olympians merged in the men's company
strong Hatred, defender of peoples, burst out, and Athene bellowed
standing now beside the ditch dug at the wall's outside
and now again at the thundering sea's edge gave out her great cry,
while on the other side Ares in the likeness of a dark stormcloud
bellowed, now from the peak of the citadel urging the Trojans
sharply on, now running beside the sweet banks of Simoeis.
So the blessed gods stirring on the opponents drove them
together, and broke out among themselves the weight of their quarrel.
From high above the father of gods and men made thunder
terribly, while Poseidon from deep under them shuddered
all the illimitable earth, the sheer heads of the mountains.
And all the feet of Ida with her many waters were shaken
and all her crests, and the city of Troy, the ships of the Achaians.
Aïdoneus, lord of the dead below, was in terror
and sprang from his throne and screamed aloud, for fear that above him
he who circles the land, Poseidon, might break the earth open
and the houses of the dead lie open to men and immortals,
ghastly and mouldering, so the very gods shudder before them;
such was the crash that sounded as the gods came driving together