So spoke Poulydamas, and this counsel of safety pleased Hektor.
And at once in all his armour he leapt to the ground from his chariot,
and the rest of the Trojans assembled, not mounted behind their horses,
but all sprang to the ground, when they saw brilliant Hektor had done it.
Then each man gave orders to his own charioteer
to check the horses in good order at the edge of the ditch,
and the fighters formed apart into groups, then closing together
into five well-ordered battalions followed their leaders.
They who went with Hektor and Poulydamas the blameless,
these were most numerous, and bravest, and beyond others furious
to smash the wall and fight their way among the hollow ships,
and Kebriones went with them as third man, while by the chariots
Hektor had left another man, not so good as Kebriones.
Paris led the next group with Alkathoös and Agenor,
and Helenos, with godlike Deïphobos, led the third group,
sons both of Priam, and Asios was with them as third man,
Asios, son of Hyrtakos, whom his tall shining horses
had carried over from Arisbe and beside the river Selleëis.
The leader of the fourth group was the strong son of Anchises,
Aineias, and with him were the two sons of Antenor,
Archelochos and Akamas, both skilled in all fighting.
Sarpedon led the far-renowned companions in battle,
and had chosen to go with him Glaukos and warlike Asteropaios
since these seemed to him to be marked out as the bravest
of the rest, after himself, but among all he was pre-eminent.
Now when these had closed their wrought ox-hide shields together
they charged straight for the Danaans, eagerly, with no thought longer
of being held, but rather to hurl themselves on the black ships.
Then the rest of the Trojans and renowned companions in battle
were willing to follow the order of blameless Poulydamas. Only
Asios, Hyrtakos' son, lord of men, was unwilling
to leave his horses there and a charioteer to attend them
but kept them with him, and so drove on at the fast-running vessels,
poor fool, who by the ships in the pride of his horses and chariot
was not destined to evade the evil spirits of destruction
nor ever to make his way back again to windy Ilion.
Before this the dark-named destiny had shrouded about him
through the spear of Idomeneus, proud son of Deukalion.
For he sent his horses to the left of the ships, where the Achaians
were streaming back from the level ground with horses and chariots,
and this way he drove his chariot and horses, and found there
the leaves not yet pushed home in the gates, nor the long door-bar,
but men were holding them wide apart, on the chance of rescuing
some one of their companions running for the ships from the battle.
Of a purpose he steered his horses straight there, and his men followed
screaming aloud, since they thought the Achaians no longer
would hold, but that they would be driven back on their dark ships.
Fools! since in the gates they found two men of the bravest,
high-hearted sons of the spear-fighting Lapithai, one
the son of Peirithoös, powerful Polypoites,
and one Leonteus, a man like the murderous god of battles.
Now these two, who had taken their place in front of the high gates,
stood there like two oaks who rear their crests in the mountains
and through day upon day stand up to the wind and the rainbeat
since their great roots reach far and are gripped in the ground. So
these two, in the confidence of their strength and their hands' work,
stood up to tall Asios advancing upon them, nor gave way.
But these, holding up high the tanned leather of their shields, moved
straight in on the strong-built wall with enormous clamour
around Asios their lord and Iamenos and Orestes,
and Asios' son Adamas, and Oinomaos and Thoön.
In this time the Lapithai still inside the wall were striving
to stir up the strong-greaved Achaians to defend the vessels,
but among the Danaans, when they saw the Trojans sweeping
on against the wall, a clamour arose, and they gave way;
and the two bursting through the gates fought on in front of them.
They were in the likeness of two wild boars who in the mountains
await a rabble of men and dogs advancing upon them
and as they go tearing slantwise and rip the timber about them
to pieces at the stock, the grinding scream of their teeth sounds
high, until some man hits them with his throw and takes the life from them;
such was the grinding scream from the bright bronze covering their chests
struck hard on by spears, for they fought a very strong battle
in the confidence of their own strength and the people above them.
These flung about them with great stones torn from the strong-founded
bastions, as they fought in defence of themselves, and the shelters,
and the fast-running vessels, so that the flung stones dropped to the ground
like snowflakes which the winds' blast whirling the shadowy clouds
drifts in their abundance along the prospering earth. So
the missiles flung from the hands of Achaians, and Trojans also,
went showering, and the helms and shields massive in the middle
crashed hollow underneath the impact of rocks like millstones.
And now Asios, Hyrtakos' son, groaned aloud and beat on
both thighs with his hands, and spoke aloud in his agony: