He spoke, and Meriones, a match for the running war god,
led the way, till they came to the place in the army he spoke for.
These, as they saw Idomeneus like a flame in his valour
himself and his henchman with him in their elaborate war gear,
they called out across the battle and gathered about him,
and an indiscriminate fight rose up by the sterns of the vessels.
And as when under the screaming winds the whirlstorms bluster
on that day when the dust lies deepest along the pathways
and the winds in the confusion of dust uplift a great cloud,
such was their indiscriminate battle, and their hearts were furious
to slaughter each other with the sharp bronze through the press of the fighting.
The battle where men perish shuddered now with the long
man-tearing spears they held in their hands, their eyes were blinded
in the dazzle of the bronze light from the glittering helmets,
from the burnished corselets and the shining shields as men came on
in confusion. That man would have to be very bold-hearted
who could be cheerful and not stricken looking on that struggle.
Two powerful sons of Kronos, hearts divided against each other,
were wreaking bitter agonies on the fighting warriors,
since Zeus willed the victory for the Trojans and Hektor,
glorifying swift-footed Achilleus, yet not utterly
did he wish the Achaian people to be destroyed before Ilion,
but only was giving glory to Thetis and her strong-spirited
son, while Poseidon emerging unseen from the grey salt water
went among the Argives and stirred them, since he was angered
that they were beaten by the Trojans and blamed Zeus for it bitterly.
Indeed, the two were of one generation and a single father,
but Zeus was the elder born and knew more. Therefore Poseidon
shrank from openly defending them, but secretly
in a man's likeness was forever stirring them up through the army.
So these two had looped over both sides a crossing
cable of strong discord and the closing of battle, not to be
slipped, not to be broken, which unstrung the knees of many.
There Idomeneus, greying though he was, called on the Danaans
and charged in upon the Trojans and drove panic among them
for he killed Othryoneus, a man who had lived in Kabesos,
who was newly come in the wake of the rumour of war, and had asked
Priam for the hand of the loveliest of his daughters,
Kassandra, without bride price, but had promised a great work for her,
to drive back the unwilling sons of the Achaians from Troy land,
and aged Priam had bent his head in assent, and promised
to give her, so Othryoneus fought in the faith of his promises.
Idomeneus aimed at him with the shining spear, and threw it,
and hit him as he came onward with high stride, and the corselet
of bronze he wore could not hold, the spear fixed in the middle belly.
He fell, thunderously, and Idomeneus vaunting cried out: