'Oh, for shame. Great sorrow settles on the land of Achaia.
Surely he would groan aloud, Peleus, the aged horseman,
the great man of counsel among the Myrmidons, and their speaker.
Once, as he questioned me in his house, he was filled with great joy
as he heard the generation and blood of all of the Argives.
Now if he were to hear how all cringe away before Hektor,
many a time he would lift up his very hands to the immortals,
and the life breath from his limbs would go down into the house of Hades.
If only, o father Zeus, Athene, Apollo,
I were in my youth as when the Pylians assembled
and the spear-fighting Arkadians battled by swirling Keladon,
by the streams of Iardanos and before the ramparts of Pheia.
Their champion stood forth, Ereuthalion, a man godlike,
wearing upon his shoulders the armour of lord Areïthoös,
Areïthoös the brilliant, given by the men of that time
and the fair-girdled women the name club-fighter, because he
went into battle armed neither with the bow nor the long spear,
but with a great bar clubbed of iron broke the battalions.
Lykourgos killed this man by craft, not strength, for he met him
in the narrow pass of the way, where the iron club served not to parry
destruction, for Lykourgos, too quick with a stab beneath it,
pinned him through the middle with the spear, so he went down backward
to the ground; and he stripped the armour brazen Ares had given him
and wore the armour thereafter himself through the grind of battle.
But when Lykourgos was grown an old man in his halls, he gave it
to his beloved henchman, Ereuthalion, to carry.
Wearing this armour he called forth all the bravest to fight him,
but they were all afraid and trembling: none had the courage,
only I, for my hard-enduring heart in its daring
drove me to fight him. I in age was the youngest of all of them.
And I fought with him, and Pallas Athene gave me the glory.
Of all the men I have killed this was the tallest and strongest.
For he sprawled in his great bulk this way and that way. If only
I were young now, as then, and the strength still steady within me;
Hektor of the glancing helm would soon find his battle.
But you, now, who are the bravest of all the Achaians,
are not minded with a good will to go against Hektor.'