So he spoke, nor did the goddess of the white arms, Hera,
disobey, but lashed on the horses, and they winged their way unreluctant
through the space between the earth and the starry heaven.
As far as into the hazing distance a man can see with
his eyes, who sits in his eyrie gazing on the wine-blue water,
as far as this is the stride of the gods' proud neighing horses.
Now as they came to Troy land and the two running rivers
where Simoeis and Skamandros dash their waters together,
there the goddess of the white arms, Hera, stayed her horses,
slipping them from the chariot, and drifting close mist about them,
and Simoeis grew as grass ambrosia for them to graze on.
Now these two walked forward in little steps like shivering
doves, in their eagerness to stand by the men of Argos,
after they had come to the place where the most and the bravest
stood close huddled about the great strength of the breaker of horses,
Diomedes; in the likeness of lions who rend their meat raw,
or wild pigs, boars, in whom the strength diminishes never,
there standing the goddess of the white arms, Hera, shouted,
likening herself to high-hearted, bronze-voiced Stentor,
who could cry out in as great a voice as fifty other men:
'Shame, you Argives, poor nonentities splendid to look on.
In those days when brilliant Achilleus came into the fighting,
never would the Trojans venture beyond the Dardanian
gates, so much did they dread the heavy spear of that man.
Now they fight by the hollow ships and far from the city.'
So she spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
But the goddess grey-eyed Athene made straight for Tydeus'
son, and found the king standing by his horses and chariot,
cooling the wound that Pandaros made with the cast of his arrow.
For the sweat made him sore underneath the broad strap of the circled
shield; this made him sore, and his arm was tired. He held up
the shield-strap, and wiped the dark blot of blood away from it.
The goddess laid hold of the harnessed horses and spoke to him:
'Tydeus got him a son who is little enough like him,
since Tydeus was a small man for stature, but he was a fighter.
Even on that time when I would not consent to his fighting
nor drawing men's eyes, when he went by himself without the Achaians
as a messenger to Thebe among all the Kadmeians,
then I invited him to feast at his ease in their great halls;
even so, keeping that heart of strength that was always within him
he challenged the young men of the Kadmeians, and defeated all of them
easily; such a helper was I who stood then beside him.
Now beside you also I stand and ever watch over you,
and urge you to fight confidently with the Trojans. And yet
the weariness has entered your limbs from many encounters,
or else it is some poor-spirited fear that holds you. If so,
you are no issue then of the son of wise Oineus, Tydeus.'
Then in answer powerful Diomedes spoke to her:
'Daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis, goddess, I know you,
and therefore will speak confidently to you, and hide nothing.
It is no poor-spirited fear nor shrinking that holds me.
Rather I remember the orders you yourself gave me
when you would not let me fight in the face of the blessed immortals--
the rest of them, except only if Aphrodite, Zeus' daughter,
went into the fighting, I might stab at her with the sharp bronze.
Therefore now have I myself given way, and I ordered
the rest of the Argives all to be gathered in this place beside me,
since I see that this who is lord of the fighting is Ares.'
Then in turn the goddess grey-eyed Athene answered him:
'Son of Tydeus, you who delight my heart, Diomedes,
no longer be thus afraid of Ares, nor of any other
immortal; such a helper shall I be standing beside you.
Come then, first against Ares steer your single-foot horses,
and strike him from close. Be not afraid of violent Ares,
that thing of fury, evil-wrought, that double-faced liar
who even now protested to Hera and me, promising
that he would fight against the Trojans and stand by the Argives.
Now, all promises forgotten, he stands by the Trojans.'
So speaking she pushed Sthenelos to the ground from the chariot,
driving him back with her hand, and he leapt away from it lightly,
and she herself, a goddess in her anger, stepped into the chariot
beside brilliant Diomedes, and the oaken axle groaned aloud
under the weight, carrying a dread goddess and a great man.
Pallas Athene then took up the whip and the reins, steering
first of all straight on against Ares the single-foot horses.
Ares was in the act of stripping gigantic Periphas,
shining son of Ochesios, far the best of the men of Aitolia.
Blood-stained Ares was in the act of stripping him. But Athene
put on the helm of Death, that stark Ares might not discern her.
Now as manslaughtering Ares caught sight of Diomedes
the brilliant, he let gigantic Periphas lie in the place where
he had first cut him down and taken the life away from him,
and made straight against Diomedes, breaker of horses.
Now as they in their advance had come close together,
Ares lunged first over the yoke and the reins of his horses
with the bronze spear, furious to take the life from him.
But the goddess grey-eyed Athene in her hand catching
the spear pushed it away from the car, so he missed and stabbed vainly.
After him Diomedes of the great war cry drove forward
with the bronze spear; and Pallas Athene, leaning in on it,
drove it into the depth of the belly where the war belt girt him.
Picking this place she stabbed and driving it deep in the fair flesh
wrenched the spear out again. Then Ares the brazen bellowed
with a sound as great as nine thousand men make, or ten thousand,
when they cry as they carry into the fighting the fury of the war god.
And a shivering seized hold alike on Achaians and Trojans
in their fear at the bellowing of battle-insatiate Ares.
As when out of the thunderhead the air shows darkening
after a day's heat when the stormy wind uprises,
thus to Tydeus' son Diomedes Ares the brazen
showed as he went up with the clouds into the wide heaven.
Lightly he came to the gods' citadel, headlong Olympos,
and sat down beside Kronian Zeus, grieving in his spirit,
and showed him the immortal blood dripping from the spear cut.
So in sorrow for himself he addressed him in winged words:
'Father Zeus, are you not angry looking on these acts of violence?
We who are gods forever have to endure the most horrible
hurts, by each other's hatred, as we try to give favour to mortals.
It is your fault we fight, since you brought forth this maniac daughter
accursed, whose mind is fixed forever on unjust action.