'Meriones, when you are a brave fighter, why say such things?--
See, dear friend, the Trojans will not give back from the body
for hard words spoken. Sooner the ground will cover them. Warfare's
finality lies in the work of hands, that of words in counsel.
It is not for us now to pile up talk, but to fight in battle.'
He spoke, and led the way, and the other followed, a mortal
like a god. As the tumult goes up from men who are cutting
timber in the mountain valleys, and the sound is heard from far off,
such was the dull crashing that rose from earth of the wide ways,
from the bronze shields, the skins and the strong-covering ox-hides
as the swords and leaf-headed spears stabbed against them. No longer
could a man, even a knowing one, have made out the godlike
Sarpedon, since he was piled from head to ends of feet under
a mass of weapons, the blood and the dust, while others about him
kept forever swarming over his dead body, as flies
through a sheepfold thunder about the pails overspilling
milk, in the season of spring when the milk splashes in the buckets.
So they swarmed over the dead man, nor did Zeus ever
turn the glaring of his eyes from the strong encounter,
but kept gazing forever upon them, in spirit reflective,
and pondered hard over many ways for the death of Patroklos;
whether this was now the time, in this strong encounter,
when there over godlike Sarpedon glorious Hektor
should kill him with the bronze, and strip the armour away from his shoulders,
or whether to increase the steep work of fighting for more men.
In the division of his heart this way seemed best to him,
for the strong henchman of Achilleus, the son of Peleus,
once again to push the Trojans and bronze-helmed Hektor
back on their city, and tear the life from many. In Hektor
first of all he put a temper that was without strength.
He climbed to his chariot and turned to flight, and called to the other
Trojans to run, for he saw the way of Zeus' sacred balance.
Nor did the powerful Lykians stand now, but were all scattered
to flight, when they had seen their king with a spear in his heart, lying
under the pile of dead men, since many others had fallen
above him, once Zeus had strained fast the powerful conflict.
But the Achaians took from Sarpedon's shoulders the armour
glaring and brazen, and this the warlike son of Menoitios
gave to his companions to carry back to the hollow ships.
And now Zeus who gathers the clouds spoke a word to Apollo: