So he spoke, and all these, a single spirit within them,
came and stood in their numbers and sloped their shields over his shoulders,
and Aineias on the other side called to his own companions,
looking to Deïphobos, and Paris, and brilliant Agenor
who were lords of the Trojans along with him, and the people after them
followed on, as when the sheep follow the lead-ram
as they leave the pasture to drink, and make proud the heart of the shepherd,
and thus also the heart of Aineias was gladdened within him
as he saw the swarm of the host following his own leadership.
These then drove on in close combat about Alkathoös
with long spears, and the bronze girding the chests of the fighters
clashed horribly to the spears they threw in the press at each other,
and two men, for warcraft pre-eminent beyond the others,
Aineias and Idomeneus, both men like the war god,
were straining with the pitiless bronze to tear at each other.
Aineias was first with a spear cast at Idomeneus,
but he, keeping his eyes straight on him, avoided the bronze spear,
so that the vibrant shaft of Aineias was driven groundward
since it had been thrown in a vain cast from his big hand.
But Idomeneus hit Oinomaos in the middle belly
and broke the hollow of the corselet, so that the entrails spurted
from the bronze, and he fell clawing the dust in his fingers.
Idomeneus wrenched out the far-shadowing spear from his body
but had no power to strip the rest of his splendid armour
away from his shoulders, since he was beaten back by their missiles,
and no longer in an outrush could his limbs stay steady beneath him
either to dash in after his spear, or to get clear again.
So in close-standing fight he beat off the pitiless death-day
as his feet no longer quick to run took him out of the fighting.
As he backed slowly Deïphobos made a cast with the shining
spear, since he held a fixed hatred forever against him,
but missed him yet once again and struck down with the spear the war god's
son Askalaphos, so that the powerful spear was driven
through his shoulder, and he dropping in the dust clawed the ground in his fingers.
But Ares the huge and bellowing had yet heard nothing
of how his son had fallen there in the strong encounter
but he, sheltered under the golden clouds on utmost Olympos,
was sitting, held fast by command of Zeus, where the rest also
of the immortal gods were sitting still, in restraint from the battle.
But the men drove on in close combat about Askalaphos.
Deïphobos tore from Askalaphos the shining helmet;
but now Meriones, a match for the running war god,
plunging upon him stabbed his arm with the spear, and the hollow-eyed
helmet dropped from his hand and fell to the ground clashing.
Meriones in yet another swoop like a vulture
plucked out the heavy spear from the arm's base at the shoulder,
then shrank into the host of his own companions. Polites,
Deïphobos' brother, caught him about the waist with both arms
and got him out of the sorrowful fighting, and reached his fast-footed
horses, where they stood to the rear of the fighting and the battle
holding their charioteer and the elaborate chariot,
and these carried him, groaning heavily, back to the city
in pain, since the blood was running from his arm's fresh wound.
But the rest fought on with clamour incessant rising about them.
There Aineias lunging at Aphareus, the son of Kaletor,
struck him with the sharp spear in the throat where it was turned toward him.
His head bent over to one side, and his shield tumbled,
and the helm, and death breaking the spirit drifted about him.
Antilochos, watching Thoön as he turned about, dashed in on him
and slashed at him, and shore away the entire vein
which runs all the way up the back till it reaches the neck. This
he shore away entire, so he sprawled in the dust backward,
reaching out both hands to his beloved companions.
Antilochos rushed on him, trying to strip the armour
from his shoulders, but watchful, as the Trojans gathered about him
from all sides, and beat at the shining broad shield, but could not
get within it and tear with the pitiless bronze Antilochos'
tender flesh, for about him the earth-shaker Poseidon
guarded the son of Nestor even in the swarm of missiles.
Since he was not making his way back clear of the enemy,
but would turn to face them nor held motionless his spear, always
it was shaken or driven forward, the desire in his heart forever
to strike someone with a spearcast or drive at him in close combat.
Adamas, Asios' son, was not blind to how he kept aiming
with his spear in the battle, and charging close stabbed with the sharp bronze
at the shield's middle, but Poseidon the dark-haired made void
his spear's stroke, nor would let him win the life of Antilochos,
and half of the spear was stuck fast like a stake fire-hardened
in Antilochos' shield, and the other half lay on the ground.
To avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions;
but as he went back Meriones dogging him threw with the spear
and struck between navel and genitals where beyond all places
death in battle comes painfully to pitiful mortals.
There the spear stuck fast driven and he, writhing about it,
gasped as an ox does when among the mountains the herdsmen
have bound him strongly in twisted ropes and drag him unwilling.
So he, stricken, gasped for a little while, but not long,
until fighting Meriones came close and wrenched the spear out
from his body, and a mist of darkness closed over both eyes.
But Helenos closing struck Deïpyros on the temple
with a huge Thracian sword, and broke the helmet to pieces
so that it was knocked off and fell to the ground. An Achaian
picked it up where it rolled among the feet of the fighters;
but the darkness of night misted over the eyes of Deïpyros.
Then sorrow caught Atreus' son Menelaos of the great war cry,
and he came on menacing and shaking his sharp spear at Helenos
the lord and fighter, who pulled against him the bow at the handgrip,
and both let fly at each other together, one with a sharp spear
in a javelin cast, and one with the arrow from the bowstring.
The son of Priam hit him then on the chest with an arrow
in the hollow of the corselet, but the bitter arrow sprang far back.
As along a great threshing floor from the broad blade
of a shovel the black-skinned beans and the chickpeas bounce high
under the whistling blast and the sweep of the winnowing fan, so
back from the corselet of glorious Menelaos the bitter
arrow rebounded far away, being driven hard back.
But Atreus' son Menelaos of the great war cry struck him
in the hand where he held the polished bow, and the bronze spear
was driven clean on through the bow and the hand beyond it.
To avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions,
dangling his wounded hand and dragging the ash spear with it.
But great-hearted Agenor drew from his hand the spear
and bound up his hand with a careful twist of wool fleece
in a sling the henchman held for the shepherd of the people.
Peisandros now came on straight against Menelaos
the glorious, but an evil destiny led him toward death's end,
to be beaten down by you, Menelaos, in the stark encounter.
Now when these in their advance were close to each other
the son of Atreus missed with his throw, and the spear was turned past him,
but Peisandros stabbed with the spear at the shield of glorious
Menelaos, but could not drive the bronze all the way through it
for the wide shield held against it and the spearshaft was broken
behind the head, yet he was light-hearted and hopeful of victory.
Drawing his sword with the silver nails, the son of Atreus
sprang at Peisandros, who underneath his shield's cover gripped
his beautiful axe with strong bronze blade upon a long polished
axe-handle of olive wood. They made their strokes at the same time
and Peisandros chopped at the horn of the helmet crested with horse-hair
at the very peak. Menelaos struck him as he came onward
in the forehead over the base of the nose, and smashed the bones, so that
both eyes dropped, bloody, and lay in the dust at his feet before him.
He fell, curling, and Menelaos, setting his heel on
his chest, stripped off his armour and spoke exulting over him: