So speading Telamonian Aias went away, and with him
went Teukros, his brother by the same father, and following them
was Pandion, who carried the curved bow for Teukros.
They kept inside the wall as they went, till they came to the bastion
of high-hearted Menestheus, and found men who were hard pressed there,
for the strong lords and men of counsel among the Lykians
came on against the battlements like a darkening stormwind,
and they charged forward to fight with these, and the clamour rose high.
First to kill his man was Telamonian Aias.
It was Sarpedon's companion in arms, high-hearted Epikles,
whom he struck with a great jagged stone, that lay at the inside
of the wall, huge, on top of the battlements. A man could not easily
hold it, not even if he were very strong, in both hands,
of men such as men are now, but he heaving it high threw it,
and smashed in the four-sheeted helm, and pounded to pieces
the bones of the head inside it, so that Epikles dropped
like a diver from the high bastion, and the life left his bones.
And Teukros with an arrow struck the strong son of Hippolochos,
Glaukos, as he was swarming aloft the wall's high bastion,
where he saw the arm was bare of defence, and stayed his warcraft;
he sprang down from the wall, secretly, for fear some Achaian
might see that he had been hit and vaunt with high words over him.
Sarpedon, as soon as he was aware that Glaukos had gone back,
was downcast, nevertheless he did not forget his warcraft
but striking with his spear at Alkmaon, the son of Thestor,
stabbed him, then wrenched the spear out, and he following the spear fell
on his face, and the armour elaborate with bronze clashed about him.
And Sarpedon, grabbing in both ponderous hands the battlements,
pulled, and the whole thing came away in his hands, and the rampart
was stripped defenceless above. He had opened a pathway for many.
Aias and Teukros aimed at him together, and Teukros
hit him with an arrow in the shining belt that encircled
his chest to hold the man-covering shield, but Zeus brushed the death spirits
from his son, and would not let him be killed there beside the ships' sterns;
and Aias plunging upon him stabbed at the shield, but the spearhead
did not pass clean through. Still, he pounded him back in his fury
so that he gave back a little space from the battlement, and yet not
utterly gave way, since his heart was still hopeful of winning glory.
He whirled about and called aloud to the godlike Lykians: