So he spoke, and took up the wrought shield of his son
Thrasymedes, breaker of horses. It lay in the shelter
all shining in bronze. Thrasymedes carried the shield of his father.
Then he caught up a powerful spear edged in sharp bronze
and stood outside the shelter, and at once saw a shameful action,
men driven to flight, and others harrying them in confusion,
the great-hearted Trojans, and the wall of the Achaians overthrown.
As when the open sea is deeply stirred to the ground-swell
but stays in one place and waits the rapid onset of tearing
gusts, nor rolls its surf onward in either direction
until from Zeus the wind is driven down to decide it;
so the aged man pondered, his mind caught between two courses,
whether to go among the throng of fast-mounted Danaans
or in search of Atreus' son Agamemnon, shepherd of the people.
And in the division of his heart this way seemed best to him,
to go after the son of Atreus, while the rest went on with the murderous
battle, and the weariless bronze about their bodies was clashing
as the men were stabbing with swords and leaf-headed spears.
Now there came toward Nestor the kings under God's hand, they who
had been wounded by the bronze and came back along the ships, Tydeus'
son, and Odysseus, and Atreus' son Agamemnon. For there
were ships that had been hauled up far away from the fighting
along the beach of the grey sea. They had hauled up the first ones
on the plain, and by the sterns of these had built their defences;
for, wide as it was, the sea-shore was not big enough to make room
for all the ships, and the people also were straitened; and therefore
they had hauled them up in depth, and filled up the long edge
of the whole sea-coast, all that the two capes compassed between them.
These lords walked in a group, each leaning on his spear, to look at
the clamorous battle, and for each the heart inside his body
was sorrowful; and Nestor the aged man who now met them
made still more cast down the spirit inside the Achaians.
Now powerful Agamemnon spoke aloud and addressed him: