'Yet even this man would have his life and strength taken from him,
dying under the hands of the Argives in his own country;
but it is my father who is so furious in his heart of evil.
He is hard, and forever wicked; he crosses my high hopes,
nor remembers at all those many times I rescued his own son,
Herakles, when the tasks of Eurystheus were too much for his strength.
And time and again he would cry out aloud to the heavens,
and Zeus would send me down in speed from the sky to help him.
If in the wiliness of my heart I had had thoughts like his,
when Herakles was sent down to Hades of the Gates, to hale back
from the Kingdom of the Dark the hound of the grisly death god,
never would he have got clear of the steep-dripping Stygian water.
Yet now Zeus hates me, and is bent to the wishes of Thetis
who kissed his knees and stroked his chin in her hand, and entreated
that he give honour to Achilleus, the sacker of cities.
Yet time shall be when he calls me again his dear girl of the grey eyes.
So then: do you put under their harness our single-foot horses
while I go back into the house of Zeus, the lord of the aegis,
and arm me in my weapons of war. So shall I discover
whether the son of Priam, Hektor of the shining helmet,
will feel joy to see us apparent on the outworks of battle,
or see if some Trojan give the dogs and the birds their desire
with fat and flesh, struck down beside the ships of the Achaians.'
She spoke, nor failed to persuade the goddess Hera of the white arms.
And she, Hera, exalted goddess, daughter of Kronos
the mighty, went away to harness the gold-bridled horses.
Now in turn Athene, daughter of Zeus of the aegis,
beside the threshold of her father slipped off her elaborate
dress which she herself had wrought with her hands' patience,
and now assuming the war tunic of Zeus who gathers
the clouds, she armed herself in her gear for the dismal fighting.
She set her feet in the blazing chariot, and took up a spear,
heavy, huge, thick, wherewith she beats down the battalions of fighting
men, against whom she of the mighty father is angered.
Hera laid the lash swiftly on the horses; and moving
of themselves groaned the gates of the sky that the Hours guarded,
those Hours to whose charge is given the huge sky and Olympos
to open up the dense darkness or again to close it.
Through the way between they held the speed of their goaded horses.
But Zeus father, watching from Ida, was angered terribly
and stirred Iris of the golden wings to run with his message: