So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
Among them Deïphobos in high purpose had come striding,
Priam's son, who held the perfect circle of his shield before him,
moving lightly on his feet as he walked in the shield's protection.
Meriones aimed at him with the shining spear, and threw it
nor missed his mark, but struck the shield on its perfect circle
of bull's hide, but the spear did not get through, but sooner
the long shaft was broken behind the head. Deïphobos
held the bull's-hide shield away from him, his heart frightened
by the spear of wise Meriones, but that hero drew back
into the host of his own companions, deeply angered
for two things, the broken spear and the loss of his battle,
and went away back to the shelters and ships of the Achaians
to bring back a long spear that was left behind in his shelter.
But the rest fought on with clamour incessant rising about them.
Teukros, son of Telamon, was the first to kill his man, Imbrios
the spearfighter, son of Mentor of the many horses, one who
before the coming of the sons of the Achaians lived in Pedaios
and had married a bastard daughter of Priam, Medesikaste.
But when the oarswept ships of the Danaans came, he went back
to Ilion, and was a great man among the Trojans, and lived
at Priam's side, who honoured him as he did his own children.
Now the son of Telamon with the long spear stabbed him under
the ear, and wrenched the spear out again, and he dropped like an ash tree
which, on the crest of a mountain glittering far about, cut down
with the bronze axe scatters on the ground its delicate leafage;
so he dropped, and the armour elaborate with bronze clashed
about him, and Teukros ran up, eager to strip the armour.
As he came on Hektor threw at him with the shining javelin,
but Teukros with his eyes straight on him avoided the bronze spear
by a little, and Hektor struck Amphimachos, son of Aktorian
Kteatos, with a spear in his chest as he swept into battle.
He fell, thunderously, and his armour clattered upon him.
Then Hektor charged in to tear the helm of great-hearted Amphimachos
from his head where it fitted close on the brows, but Aias
thrust with the shining spear at Hektor as he came onward;
he could not manage to reach the skin, since this was all shrouded
in the ghastly bronze, but drove at the shield's mass in the middle
and beat him back in great strength so that Hektor gave ground backward
from both corpses. These the Achaians dragged out of the fighting.
Then Stichios and brilliant Menestheus, lords of the Athenians,
carried Amphimachos back among the Achaian people.
But the two Aiantes in the fury of their fierce war strength,
as two lions catch up a goat from the guard of rip-fanged
hounds, and carry it into the density of the underbrush,
holding it high from the ground in the crook of their jaws, so the lordly
two Aiantes lifted Imbrios high and stripped him
of his armour, and the son of Oïleus, in anger
for Amphimachos, hewed away his head from the soft neck
and threw it spinning like a ball through the throng of fighters
until it came to rest in the dust at the feet of Hektor.
Then Poseidon was angered about the heart at his grandson's
slaying in the bitter hostility, so the god went forth
on his way among the shelters and ships of the Achaians
and stirred the Danaans, and worked disaster against the Trojans.
Idomeneus the spear-famed encountered him, on his way
from a companion, who had just before come back from the fighting
wounded in the hollow behind the knee by the sharp bronze.
This man his companions carried away. Idomeneus had given
the healers instructions and gone on to his shelter, still burning
to face the battle, and now the strong earth-shaker spoke to him.
Poseidon likened his voice to Thoas, son of Andraimon,
lord of the Aitolians over all Pleuron, and headlong
Kalydon, who was honoured in his countryside as a god is: