He spoke, and under the chariot harnessed his bronze-shod horses,
flying-footed, with long manes streaming of gold; and he put on
clothing of gold about his own body, and took up the golden
lash, carefully compacted, and climbed up into his chariot,
and whipped them into a run, and they winged their way unreluctant
through the space between the earth and the starry heaven.
He came to Ida with all her springs, the mother of wild beasts,
to Gargaron, where was his holy ground and his smoking altar.
There the father of gods and of mortals halted his horses,
and slipped them from their harness, and drifted close mist about them,
and himself rejoicing in the pride of his strength sat down on the mountain
looking out over the city of Troy and the ships of the Achaians.
Now the flowing-haired Achaians had taken their dinner
lightly among their shelters, and they put on their armour thereafter;
and on the other side, in the city, the Trojans took up
their armour, fewer men, yet minded to stand the encounter
even so, caught in necessity, for their wives and their children.
And all the gates were made open, and the fighting men swept through them,
the foot ranks and the horsemen, and the sound grew huge of their onset.
Now as these advancing came to one place and encountered,
they dashed their shields together and their spears, and the strength of
armoured men in bronze, and the shields massive in the middle
clashed against each other, and the sound grew huge of the fighting.
There the screaming and the shouts of triumph rose up together
of men killing and men killed, and the ground ran blood.
So long as it was early morning and the sacred daylight increasing,
so long the thrown weapons of both took hold and men dropped under them.
But when the sun god stood bestriding the middle heaven,
then the father balanced his golden scales, and in them
he set two fateful portions of death, which lays men prostrate,
for Trojans, breakers of horses, and bronze-armoured Achaians,
and balanced it by the middle. The Achaians' death-day was heaviest.
There the fates of the Achaians settled down toward the bountiful
earth, while those of the Trojans were lifted into the wide sky;
and he himself crashed a great stroke from Ida, and a kindling
flash shot over the people of the Achaians; seeing it
they were stunned, and pale terror took hold of all of them.
Then Idomeneus dared not stand his ground, nor Agamemnon,
nor did the two Aiantes stand, the henchmen of Ares,
only Gerenian Nestor stayed, the Achaians' watcher;
not that he would, but his horse was failing, struck by an arrow
from brilliant Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen;
struck at the point of the head, where the utmost hairs of horses
are grown along the skull, and which is a place most mortal.
He reared up in agony as the shaft went into the brain, then
threw the team into confusion writhing upon the bronze point.
Now as the old man hewed away the horse's trace-harness
with a quick sword-cut, meanwhile the fast-running horses of Hektor
came through the flux of the fighting and carried their daring driver,
Hektor; and now the old man would have lost his life there, had not
Diomedes of the great war cry sharply perceived him.
He cried out in a terrible voice to rally Odysseus: