He wielded in his hands a great pike for sea fighting,
twenty-two cubits long and joined together by clinchers.
And as a man who is an expert rider of horses
who when he has chosen and coupled four horses out of many
makes his way over the plain galloping toward a great city
along the travelled road, and many turn to admire him,
men or women, while he steadily and never slipping
jumps and shifts his stance from one to another as they gallop;
so Aias ranged crossing from deck to deck of the fast ships
taking huge strides, and his voice went always up to the bright sky
as he kept up a terrible bellow and urged on the Danaans
to defend their ships and their shelters, while on the other side Hektor
would not stay back among the mass of close-armoured Trojans,
but as a flashing eagle makes his plunge upon other
flying birds as these feed in a swarm by a river,
whether these be geese or cranes or swans long-throated,
so Hektor steered the course of his outrush straight for a vessel
with dark prows, and from behind Zeus was pushing him onward
hard with his big hand, and stirred on his people beside him.
Now once again a grim battle was fought by the vessels;
you would say that they faced each other unbruised, unwearied
in the fighting, from the speed in which they went for each other.
This was the thought in each as they struggled on: the Achaians
thought they could not get clear of the evil, but must perish,
while the heart inside each one of the Trojans was hopeful
to set fire to the ships and kill the fighting men of Achaia.
With such thoughts in mind they stood up to fight with each other.
Hektor caught hold of the stern of a grand, fast-running,
seafaring ship, that once had carried Protesilaos
to Troy, and did not take him back to the land of his fathers.
It was around his ship that now Achaians and Trojans
cut each other down at close quarters, nor any longer
had patience for the volleys exchanged from bows and javelins
but stood up close against each other, matching their fury,
and fought their battle with sharp hatchets and axes, with great
swords and with leaf-headed pikes, and many magnificent
swords were scattered along the ground, black-thonged, heavy-hilted,
sometimes dropping from the hands, some glancing from shoulders
of men as they fought, so the ground ran black with blood. Hektor
would not let go of the stern of a ship where he had caught hold of it
but gripped the sternpost in his hands and called to the Trojans:
'Bring fire, and give single voice to the clamour of battle.
Now Zeus has given us a day worth all the rest of them:
the ships' capture, the ships that came here in spite of the gods' will
and have visited much pain on us, by our counsellors' cowardice
who would not let me fight by the grounded ships, though I wanted to,
but held me back in restraint, and curbed in our fighters.
But Zeus of the wide brows, though then he fouled our intentions,
comes now himself to urge us on and give us encouragement.'