So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
There Hektor killed the son of Perimedes, Schedios,
lord of the men of Phokis; but Aias killed Laodamas,
leader of the foot-soldiers, and shining son of Antenor.
Then Poulydamas stripped Otos of Kyllene, companion
to Meges, Phyleus' son, and a lord among the great-hearted
Epeians. Meges seeing it lunged at him, but Poulydamas
bent down and away, so that Meges missed him. Apollo
would not let Panthoös' son go down among the front fighters,
but Meges stabbed with the spear the middle of the chest of Kroismos.
He fell, thunderously, and Meges was stripping the armour
from his shoulders, but meanwhile Dolops lunged at him, Lampos'
son, a man crafty with the spear and strongest of the sons born
to Lampos, Laomedon's son, one skilled in furious fighting.
He from close up stabbed with his spear at the shield of Phyleides
in the middle, but the corselet he wore defended him, solid
and built with curving plates of metal, which in days past Phyleus
had taken home from Ephyra and the river Selleëis.
A guest and friend had given him it, lord of men, Euphetes,
to carry into the fighting and beat off the attack of the enemy,
and now it guarded the body of his son from destruction.
But Meges stabbed with the sharp spear at the uttermost summit
of the brazen helmet thick with horse-hair, and tore off
the mane of horse-hair from the helmet, so that it toppled
groundward and lay in the dust in all its new shining of purple.
Yet Dolops stood his ground and fought on, in hope still of winning,
but meanwhile warlike Menelaos came to stand beside Meges,
and came from the side and unobserved with his spear, and from behind
threw at his shoulder, so the spear tore through his chest in its fury
to drive on, so that Dolops reeled and went down, face forward.
The two of them swept in to strip away from his shoulders
the bronze armour, but Hektor called aloud to his brothers,
the whole lot, but first scolded the son of Hiketaon,
strong Melanippos. He in Perkote had tended his lumbering
cattle, in the days before when the enemy were still far off;
but when the oarswept ships of the Danaans came, then
he returned to Ilion, and was a great man among the Trojans,
and lived with Priam, who honoured him as he honoured his children.
Now Hektor spoke a word and called him by name and scolded him: