He spoke, and Patroklos was helming himself in bronze that glittered.
First he placed along his legs the beautiful greaves, linked
with silver fastenings to hold the greaves at the ankles.
Afterwards he girt on about his chest the corselet
starry and elaborate of swift-footed Aiakides.
Across his shoulders he slung the sword with the nails of silver,
a bronze sword, and above it the great shield, huge and heavy.
Over his mighty head he set the well-fashioned helmet
with the horse-hair crest, and the plumes nodded terribly above it.
He took up two powerful spears that fitted his hand's grip,
only he did not take the spear of blameless Aiakides,
huge, heavy, thick, which no one else of all the Achaians
could handle, but Achilleus alone knew how to wield it;
the Pelian ash spear which Cheiron had brought to his father
from high on Pelion to be death for fighters. Patroklos
ordered Automedon rapidly to harness the horses,
a man he honoured most, after Achilleus breaker of battles,
who stood most staunchly by him against the fury of fighting.
For him Automedon led the fast-running horses under
the yoke, Xanthos and Balios, who tore with the winds' speed,
horses stormy Podarge once conceived of the west wind
and bore, as she grazed in the meadow beside the swirl of the Ocean.
In the traces beside these he put unfaulted Pedasos
whom Achilleus brought back once when he stormed Eëtion's city.
He, mortal as he was, ran beside the immortal horses.
But Achilleus went meanwhile to the Myrmidons, and arrayed them
all in their war gear along the shelters. And they, as wolves
who tear flesh raw, in whose hearts the battle fury is tireless,
who have brought down a great horned stag in the mountains, and then feed
on him, till the jowls of every wolf run blood, and then go
all in a pack to drink from a spring of dark-running water,
lapping with their lean tongues along the black edge of the surface
and belching up the clotted blood; in the heart of each one
is a spirit untremulous, but their bellies are full and groaning;
as such the lords of the Myrmidons and their men of counsel
around the brave henchman of swift-footed Aiakides
swarmed, and among them was standing warlike Achilleus
and urged on the fighting men with their shields, and the horses.
Fifty were the fast-running ships wherein Achilleus
beloved of Zeus had led his men to Troy, and in each one
were fifty men, his companions in arms, at the rowing benches.
He had made five leaders among them, and to these entrusted
the command, while he in his great power was lord over all of them.
One battalion was led by Menesthios of the shining
corselet, son of Spercheios, the river swelled from the bright sky,
born of the daughter of Peleus, Polydore the lovely,
to unremitting Spercheios, when a woman lay with an immortal;
but born in name to Perieres' son, Boros, who married
Polydore formally, and gave gifts beyond count to win her.
The next battalion was led by warlike Eudoros, a maiden's
child, born to one lovely in the dance, Polymele,
daughter of Phylas; whom strong Hermes Argeiphontes
loved, when he watched her with his eyes among the girls dancing
in the choir for clamorous Artemis of the golden distaff.
Presently Hermes the healer went up with her into her chamber
and lay secretly with her, and she bore him a son, the shining
Eudoros, a surpassing runner and a quick man in battle.
But after Eileithyia of the hard pains had brought out
the child into the light, and he looked on the sun's shining,
Aktor's son Echekles in the majesty of his great power
led her to his house, when he had given numberless gifts to win her,
and the old man Phylas took the child and brought him up kindly
and cared for him, in affection as if he had been his own son.
The leader of the third battalion was warlike Peisandros,
Maimalos' son, who outshone all the rest of the Myrmidons
in spear-fighting, next to Peleian Achilleus' henchman.
The fourth battalion was led by Phoinix, the aged horseman,
the fifth by Alkimedon, the blameless son of Laerkes.
But after Achilleus gave them their stations all in good order
beside their leaders, he laid his stern injunction upon them: