He spoke, and led the way, and the other followed, a mortal
like a god. They found Odysseus beloved of Zeus, and around him
the Trojans crowded, as bloody scavengers in the mountains
crowd on a horned stag who is stricken, one whom a hunter
shot with an arrow from the string, and the stag has escaped him, running
with his feet, while the blood stayed warm, and his knees were springing beneath him.
But when the pain of the flying arrow has beaten him, then
the rending scavengers begin to feast on him in the mountains
and the shaded glen. But some spirit leads that way a dangerous
lion, and the scavengers run in terror, and the lion eats it;
so about wise much-devising Odysseus the Trojans
crowded now, valiant and numerous, but the hero
with rapid play of his spear beat off the pitiless death-day.
Now Aias came near him, carrying like a wall his shield,
and stood forth beside him, and the Trojans fled one way and another.
Then taking Odysseus by the hand warlike Menelaos
led him from the battle, while his henchman drove the horses close up.
But Aias leaping upon the Trojans struck down Doryklos,
Priam's son, but a bastard, and thereafter stabbed Pandokos,
and so also Lysandros and Pyrasos and Pylartes.
As when a swollen river hurls its water, big with rain,
down the mountains to the flat land following rain from the sky god,
and sweeps down with it numbers of dry oaks and of pine trees
numbers, until it hurls its huge driftwood into the salt sea;
so now glittering Aias cumbered the plain as he chased them,
slaughtering men and horses alike, nor yet had Hektor
heard, since he was fighting at the left of the entire battle
by the banks of Skamandros river, where more than elsewhere
the high heads of men were dropping, and the tireless clamour
rising about tall Nestor and Idomeneus the warlike.
Now Hektor was encountering these and doing grim work
with spear and horsemanship, ruining the battalions of young men.
Yet even so the Achaians would not have given from his path
had not Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen,
stayed from his bravery the shepherd of the people, Machaon,
hitting him with a three-barbed arrow in the right shoulder.
And the Achaians whose wind was fury were frightened for him,
that the enemy might catch him in the backturn of the fighting.
At once Idomeneus called out to brilliant Nestor: