'Argives, you arrow-fighters, have you no shame, you abuses?
Why are you simply standing there bewildered, like young deer
who after they are tired from running through a great meadow
stand there still, and there is no heart of courage within them?
Thus are you standing still bewildered and are not fighting.
Or are you waiting for the Trojans to come close, where the strong-sterned
ships have been hauled up along the strand of the grey sea,
so you may know if Kronos' son will hold his hand over you?'
Thus he ranged through the ranks of his men and set them in order.
On his way through the thronging men he came to the Kretans
who about valiant Idomeneus were arming for battle.
Idomeneus, like a boar in his strength, stood among the champions
while Meriones still urged along the last battalions.
Agamemnon the lord of men was glad as he looked at them
and in words of graciousness at once spoke to Idomeneus:
'I honour you, Idomeneus, beyond the fast-mounted
Danaans whether in battle, or in any action whatever,
whether it be at the feast, when the great men of the Argives
blend in the mixing bowl the gleaming wine of the princes.
Even though all the rest of the flowing-haired Achaians
drink out their portion, still your cup stands filled forever
even as mine, for you to drink when the pleasure takes you.
Rise up then to battle, be such as you claimed in time past.'
Then in turn Idomeneus lord of the Kretans answered him:
'Son of Atreus, I will in truth be a staunch companion
in arms, as first I promised you and bent my head to it.
Rouse up rather the rest of the flowing-haired Achaians
so that we may fight in all speed, since the Trojans have broken
their oaths: a thing that shall be death and sorrow hereafter
to them, since they were the first to do violence over the oaths sworn.'
So he spoke, and Atreides, cheerful at heart, went onward.
On his way through the thronging men he came to the Aiantes.
These were armed, and about them went a cloud of foot-soldiers.
As from his watching place a goatherd watches a cloud move
on its way over the sea before the drive of the west wind;
far away though he be he watches it, blacker than pitch is,
moving across the sea and piling the storm before it,
and as he sees it he shivers and drives his flocks to a cavern;
so about the two Aiantes moved the battalions,
close-compacted of strong and god-supported young fighters,
black, and jagged with spear and shield, to the terror of battle.
Agamemnon the lord of men was glad when he looked at them,
and he spoke aloud to them and addressed them in winged words:
'Aiantes, o leaders of the bronze-armoured Argives,
to you two I give no orders; it would not become me
to speed you, now that yourselves drive your people on to fight strongly.
Father Zeus, and Athene, and Apollo, if only
such a spirit were in the hearts of all of my people.
Then perhaps the city of lord Priam would be bent
underneath our hands, captured and utterly taken.'
So he spoke, and left them there, and went among others.
There he came upon Nestor, the lucid speaker of Pylos,
setting in order his own companions and urging them to battle,
tall Pelagon with those about him, Alastor and Chromios,
Haimon the powerful, and Bias, shepherd of the people.
First he ranged the mounted men with their horses and chariots
and stationed the brave and numerous foot-soldiers behind them
to be the bastion of battle, and drove the cowards to the centre
so that a man might be forced to fight even though unwilling.
First he gave orders to the drivers of horses, and warned them
to hold their horses in check and not be fouled in the multitude:
'Let no man in the pride of his horsemanship and his manhood
dare to fight alone with the Trojans in front of the rest of us,
neither let him give ground, since that way you will be weaker.
When a man from his own car encounters the enemy chariots
let him stab with his spear, since this is the stronger fighting.
So the men before your time sacked tower and city,
keeping a spirit like this in their hearts, and like this their purpose.'
Thus the old man wise in fighting from of old encouraged them.
Agamemnon the lord of men was glad when he looked at him
and he spoke aloud to him and addressed him in winged words:
'Aged sir, if only, as the spirit is in your bosom,
so might your knees be also and the strength stay steady within you;
but age weakens you which comes to all; if only some other
of the fighters had your age and you were one of the young men!'
Nestor the Gerenian horseman spoke and answered him:
'Son of Atreus, so would I also wish to be that
man I was, when I cut down brilliant Ereuthalion.
But the gods give to mortals not everything at the same time;
if I was a young man then, now in turn old age is upon me.
Yet even so I shall be among the riders, and command them
with word and counsel; such is the privilege of the old men.
The young spearmen shall do the spear-fighting, those who are born
of a generation later than mine, who trust in their own strength.'
So he spoke, and Atreides, cheerful at heart, went onward.
He came on the son of Peteos, Menestheus, driver of horses,
standing still, and about him the Athenians, urgent for battle.
Next to these resourceful Odysseus had taken position,
and beside him the Kephallenian ranks, no weak ones,
were standing, since the men had not heard the clamour of battle
but even now fresh set in motion moved the battalions
of Achaians and Trojans, breakers of horses; so these standing
waited, until some other mass of Achaians advancing
might crash against the Trojans, and the battle be opened.
Seeing these the lord of men Agamemnon scolded them
and spoke aloud to them and addressed them in winged words, saying:
'Son of Peteos, the king supported of God: and you, too,
you with your mind forever on profit and your ways of treachery,
why do you stand here skulking aside, and wait for the others?
For you two it is becoming to stand among the foremost
fighters, and endure your share of the blaze of battle;
since indeed you two are first to hear of the feasting
whenever we Achaians make ready a feast of the princes.
There it is your pleasure to eat the roast flesh, to drink
as much as you please the cups of the wine that is sweet as honey.
Now, though, you would be pleased to look on though ten battalions
of Achaians were to fight with the pitiless bronze before you.'
Then looking at him darkly resourceful Odysseus spoke to him:
'What is this word that broke through the fence of your teeth, Atreides?
How can you say that, when we Achaians waken the bitter
war god on Trojans, breakers of horses, I hang back from
fighting? Only watch, if you care to and if it concerns you,
the very father of Telemachos locked with the champion
Trojans, breakers of horses. Your talk is wind, and no meaning.'
Powerful Agamemnon in turn answered him, laughing,
seeing that he was angered and taking back the word spoken:
'Son of Laertes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus:
I must not be niggling with you, nor yet give you orders,
since I know how the spirit in your secret heart knows
ideas of kindness only; for what you think is what I think.
Come now, I will make it good hereafter, if anything evil
has been said; let the gods make all this come to nothing.'
So he spoke, and left him there, and went among others.
He came on the son of Tydeus, high-spirited Diomedes,
standing among the compacted chariots and by the horses,
and Kapaneus' son, Sthenelos, was standing beside him. At sight
of Diomedes the lord of men Agamemnon scolded him
and spoke aloud to him and addressed him in winged words, saying:
'Ah me, son of Tydeus, that daring breaker of horses,
why are you skulking and spying out the outworks of battle?
Such was never Tydeus' way, to lurk in the background,
but to fight the enemy far ahead of his own companions.
So they say who had seen him at work, since I never saw nor
encountered him ever; but they say he surpassed all others.
Once on a time he came, but not in war, to Mykenai
with godlike Polyneikes, a guest and a friend, assembling
people, since these were attacking the sacred bastions of Thebe,
and much they entreated us to grant him renowned companions.
And our men wished to give them and were assenting to what they asked for
but Zeus turned them back, showing forth portents that crossed them.
Now as these went forward and were well on their way, and came
to the river Asopos, and the meadows of grass and the deep rushes,
from there the Achaians sent Tydeus ahead with a message.
He went then and came on the Kadmeians in their numbers
feasting all about the house of mighty Eteokles.
There, stranger though he was, the driver of horses, Tydeus,
was not frightened, alone among so many Kadmeians,
but dared them to try their strength with him, and bested all of them
easily, such might did Pallas Athene give him.
The Kadmeians who lash their horses, in anger compacted
an ambuscade of guile on his way home, assembling together
fifty fighting men, and for these there were two leaders,
Maion, Haimon's son, in the likeness of the immortals,
with the son of Autophonos, Polyphontes stubborn in battle.
On these men Tydeus let loose a fate that was shameful.
He killed them all, except that he let one man get home again,
letting Maion go in obedience to the god's signs.
This was Tydeus, the Aitolian; yet he was father
to a son worse than himself at fighting, better in conclave.'
So he spoke, and strong Diomedes gave no answer
in awe before the majesty of the king's rebuking;
but the son of Kapaneus the glorious answered him, saying:
'Son of Atreus, do not lie when you know the plain truth.
We two claim we are better men by far than our fathers.
We did storm the seven-gated foundation of Thebe
though we led fewer people beneath a wall that was stronger.
We obeyed the signs of the gods and the help Zeus gave us,
while those others died of their own headlong stupidity.
Therefore, never liken our fathers to us in honour.'
Then looking at him darkly strong Diomedes spoke to him:
'Friend, stay quiet rather and do as I tell you; I will
find no fault with Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
for stirring thus into battle the strong-greaved Achaians;
this will be his glory to come, if ever the Achaians
cut down the men of Troy and capture sacred Ilion.
If the Achaians are slain, then his will be the great sorrow.
Come, let you and me remember our fighting courage.'
He spoke and leapt in all his gear to the ground from the chariot,
and the bronze armour girt to the chest of the king clashed terribly
as he sprang. Fear would have gripped even a man stout-hearted.
As when along the thundering beach the surf of the sea strikes
beat upon beat as the west wind drives it onward; far out
cresting first on the open water, it drives thereafter
to smash roaring along the dry land, and against the rock jut
bending breaks itself into crests spewing back the salt wash;
so thronged beat upon beat the Danaans' close battalions
steadily into battle, with each of the lords commanding
his own men; and these went silently, you would not think
all these people with voices kept in their chests were marching;
silently, in fear of their commanders; and upon all
glittered as they marched the shining armour they carried.
But the Trojans, as sheep in a man of possessions' steading
stand in their myriads waiting to be drained of their white milk
and bleat interminably as they hear the voice of their lambs, so
the crying of the Trojans went up through the wide army.
Since there was no speech nor language common to all of them
but their talk was mixed, who were called there from many far places.
Ares drove these on, and the Achaians grey-eyed Athene,
and Terror drove them, and Fear, and Hate whose wrath is relentless,
she the sister and companion of murderous Ares,
she who is only a little thing at the first, but thereafter
grows until she strides on the earth with her head striking heaven.
She then hurled down bitterness equally between both sides
as she walked through the onslaught making men's pain heavier.
Now as these advancing came to one place and encountered,
they dashed their shields together and their spears, and the strength
of armoured men in bronze, and the shields massive in the middle
clashed against each other, and the sound grew huge of the fighting.