'Trojans and Dardanians and companions in arms: hear me.
Now I had thought that, destroying the ships and all the Achaians,
we might take our way back once more to windy Ilion,
but the darkness came too soon, and this beyond all else rescued
the Argives and their vessels along the beach where the sea breaks.
But now let us give way to black night's persuasion; let us
make ready our evening meal, and as for your flowing-maned horses,
set them free from their harness, and cast down fodder before them.
And lead forth also out of the city oxen and fat sheep
in all speed, and convey out also the kindly sweet wine
with food out of our houses. And heap many piles of firewood,
so that all night long and until the young dawn appears
we may burn many fires, and the glare go up into heaven;
so that not in the night-time the flowing-haired Achaians
may set out to run for home over the sea's wide ridges.
No: not thus in their own good time must they take to their vessels,
but in such a way that a man of them at home will still nurse
his wound, the place where he has been hit with an arrow or sharp spear
springing to his ship; so that another may shrink hereafter
from bringing down fearful war on the Trojans, breakers of horses.
And let the heralds Zeus loves give orders about the city
for the boys who are in their first youth and the grey-browed elders
to take stations on the god-founded bastions that circle the city;
and as for the women, have our wives, each one in her own house,
kindle a great fire; let there be a watch kept steadily
lest a sudden attack get into the town when the fighters have left it.
Let it be thus, high-hearted men of Troy, as I tell you.
Let that word that has been spoken now be a strong one,
with that which I speak at dawn to the Trojans, breakers of horses.
For in good hope I pray to Zeus and the other immortals
that we may drive from our place these dogs swept into destruction
whom the spirits of death have carried here on their black ships.
Now for the night we shall keep watch on ourselves, and tomorrow
early, before dawn shows, shall arm ourselves in our weapons
and beside their hollow vessels waken the bitter war god;
and I shall know if the son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes,
will force me back from the ships against the wall, or whether I
shall cut him down with the bronze and take home the blooded war-spoils.
Tomorrow he will learn his own strength, if he can stand up to
my spear's advance; but sooner than this, I think, in the foremost
he will go down under the stroke, and many companions about him
as the sun goes up into tomorrow. Oh, if I only
could be as this in all my days immortal and ageless
and be held in honour as Athene and Apollo are honoured
as surely as this oncoming day brings evil to the Argives.'