He spoke, and let fly another shaft from the bowstring,
straight for Hektor, and all his heart was straining to hit him;
but missed his man, and struck down instead a strong son of Priam,
Gorgythion the blameless, hit in the chest by an arrow;
Gorgythion whose mother was lovely Kastianeira,
Priam's bride from Aisyme, with the form of a goddess.
He bent drooping his head to one side, as a garden poppy
bends beneath the weight of its yield and the rains of springtime;
so his head bent slack to one side beneath the helm's weight.
But Teukros now let fly another shaft from the bowstring,
straight for Hektor, and all his heart was straining to hit him,
yet missed his man once again as Apollo faltered his arrow,
and struck Archeptolemos, bold charioteer of Hektor,
in the chest next to the nipple as he charged into the fighting.
He fell out of the chariot, and the fast-footed horses
shied away. And there his life and his strength were scattered.
And bitter sorrow closed over Hektor's heart for his driver,
yet grieving as he did for his friend he left him to lie there,
and called to his brother Kebriones who stood near to take up
the reins of the horses, nor did he disobey him. But Hektor
himself vaulted down to the ground from the shining chariot
crying a terrible cry and in his hand caught up a great stone,
and went straight for Teukros, heart urgent to hit him. Now Teukros
had drawn a bitter arrow out of his quiver, and laid it
along the bowstring, but as he drew the shaft by his shoulder,
there where between neck and chest the collar-bone interposes,
and this is a spot most mortal; in this place shining-helmed Hektor
struck him in all his fury with the jagged boulder, smashing
the sinew, and all his arm at the wrist was deadened.
He dropped to one knee and stayed, and the bow fell from his hand. Aias
was not forgetful of his fallen brother, but running
stood bestriding him and covered him under the great shield.
Thereon Mekisteus, son of Echios, and brilliant Alastor,
two staunch companions, stooping beneath it, caught up Teukros
and carried him, groaning heavily, to the hollow vessels.
Now once again the Olympian filled the Trojans with fury
and they piled the Achaians straight backward against the deep ditch,
as Hektor ranged in their foremost ranks in the pride of his great strength.
As when some hunting hound in the speed of his feet pursuing
a wild boar or a lion snaps from behind at his quarters
or flanks, but watches for the beast to turn upon him, so Hektor
followed close on the heels of the flowing-haired Achaians,
killing ever the last of the men; and they fled in terror.
But after they had crossed back over the ditch and the sharp stakes
in flight, and many had gone down under the hands of the Trojans,
they reined in and stood fast again beside their ships, calling
aloud upon each other, and to all of the gods uplifting
their hands each man of them cried out his prayers in a great voice,
while Hektor, wearing the stark eyes of a Gorgon, or murderous
Ares, wheeled about at the edge his bright-maned horses.
Now seeing them the goddess of the white arms, Hera, took pity
and immediately she spoke to Pallas Athene her winged words: