So he spoke, and they listened to him with care, and obeyed him.
They who rallied about Aias, the lord Idomeneus,
Teukros, Meriones, and Meges, a man like the war god,
closed their order for hard impact, calling on the bravest
to face Hektor and the Trojans. Meanwhile behind them
the multitude made their way back toward the ships of the Achaians.
The Trojans came down on them in a pack, and Hektor led them
in long strides, and in front of him went Phoibos Apollo
wearing a mist about his shoulders, and held the tempestuous
terrible aegis, shaggy, conspicuous, that the bronze-smith
Hephaistos had given Zeus to wear to the terror of mortals.
Gripping this in both hands he led on the Trojan people.
But the Argives stood in close order against them, and the battle cry rose up
in a thin scream from either side, the arrows from the bowstrings
jumping, while from violent hands the numerous thrown spears
were driven, some deep in the bodies of quick-stirring young men,
while many in the space between before they had got to the white skin
stood fast in the ground, though they had been straining to reach the bodies.
So long as Phoibos Apollo held stilled in his hands the aegis,
so long the thrown weapons of both took hold, and men dropped under them.
But when he stared straight into the eyes of the fast-mounted Danaans
and shook the aegis, and himself gave a great baying cry, the spirit
inside them was mazed to hear it, they forgot their furious valour.
And they, as when in the dim of the black night two wild beasts
stampede a herd of cattle or big flock of sheep, falling
suddenly upon them, when no herdsman is by, the Achaians
fled so in their weakness and terror, since Apollo drove
terror upon them, and gave the glory to the Trojans and Hektor.
There man killed man all along the scattered encounter.
Hektor first killed Stichios and Arkesilaos,
one the leader of the bronze-armoured Boiotians, the other
trusted companion in arms of great-hearted Menestheus.
But Aineias slaughtered Medon and Iasos. Of these
Medon was a bastard son of godlike Oïleus
and therefore brother of Aias, but had made his home in Phylake
away from the land of his fathers, having killed a man, a relation
of Eriopis, his stepmother, the wife of Oileus.
Iasos was a leader appointed of the Athenians,
and was called the son of Sphelos, the son of Boukolos.
Poulydamas killed Mekisteus, and Polites Echios
in the first onfall, and brilliant Agenor cut down Klonios.
Paris struck Deïochos from behind at the shoulder's
base, as he ran away through the front ranks, and drove the bronze clean through.
While these stripped the armour from their men, meanwhile the Achaians
blundering about the deep-dug ditch and the sharp stakes
ran this way and that in terror, forced into their rampart.
But Hektor called aloud in a piercing cry to the Trojans:
'Make hard for the ships, let the bloody spoils be. That man
I see in the other direction apart from the vessels,
I will take care that he gets his death, and that man's relations
neither men nor women shall give his dead body the rite of burning.
In the space before our city the dogs shall tear him to pieces.'