'Ah, Patroklos, illustrious, what is this you are saying?
I have not any prophecy in mind that I know of;
there is no word from Zeus my honoured mother has told me,
but this thought comes as a bitter sorrow to my heart and my spirit
when a man tries to foul one who is his equal, to take back
a prize of honour, because he goes in greater authority.
This is a bitter thought to me; my desire has been dealt with
roughly. The girl the sons of the Achaians chose out for my honour,
and I won her with my own spear, and stormed a strong-fenced city,
is taken back out of my hands by powerful Agamemnon,
the son of Atreus, as if I were some dishonoured vagabond.
Still, we will let all this be a thing of the past; and it was not
in my heart to be angry forever; and yet I have said
I would not give over my anger until that time came
when the fighting with all its clamour came up to my own ships.
So do you draw my glorious armour about your shoulders;
lead the Myrmidons whose delight is battle into the fighting,
if truly the black cloud of the Trojans has taken position
strongly about our ships, and the others, the Argives, are bent back
against the beach of the sea, holding only a narrow division
of land, and the whole city of the Trojans has descended upon them
boldly; because they do not see the face of my helmet
glaring close; or else they would run and cram full of dead men
the water-courses; if powerful Agamemnon treated me
kindly. Now the Argives fight for their very encampment.
For the spear rages not now in the hands of the son of Tydeus,
Diomedes, to beat destruction aside from the Danaans,
nor have I heard the voice of the son of Atreus crying
from his hated head; no, but the voice of murderous Hektor
calling to the Trojans crashes about my ears; with their war cry
they hold the entire plain as they beat the Achaians in battle.
But even so, Patroklos, beat the bane aside from our ships; fall
upon them with all your strength; let them not with fire's blazing
inflame our ships, and take away our desired homecoming.
But obey to the end this word I put upon your attention
so that you can win, for me, great honour and glory
in the sight of all the Danaans, so they will bring back to me
the lovely girl, and give me shining gifts in addition.
When you have driven them from the ships, come back; although later
the thunderous lord of Hera might grant you the winning of glory,
you must not set your mind on fighting the Trojans, whose delight
is in battle, without me. So you will diminish my honour.
You must not, in the pride and fury of fighting, go on
slaughtering the Trojans, and lead the way against Ilion,
for fear some one of the everlasting gods on Olympos
might crush you. Apollo who works from afar loves these people
dearly. You must turn back once you bring the light of salvation
to the ships, and let the others go on fighting in the flat land.
Father Zeus, Athene and Apollo, if only
not one of all the Trojans could escape destruction, not one
of the Argives, but you and I could emerge from the slaughter
so that we two alone could break Troy's hallowed coronal.'