So he spoke, and they listened hard to him, and obeyed him.
The kings in person marshalled these men, although they were wounded,
Tydeus' son, and Odysseus, and Atreus' son Agamemnon.
They went among all, and made them exchange their armour of battle,
and the good fighter put on the good armour, and each gave the worse gear
to the worse. Then when in the shining bronze they had shrouded their bodies
they went forward, and Poseidon the shaker of the earth led them
holding in his heavy hand the stark sword with the thin edge
glittering, as glitters the thunderflash none may close with
by right in sorrowful division, but fear holds all men back.
On the other side glorious Hektor ordered the Trojans,
and now Poseidon of the dark hair and glorious Hektor
strained to its deadliest the division of battle, the one
bringing power to the Trojans, and the god to the Argives.
The breaking of the sea washed up to the ships and the shelters
of the Argives. The two sides closed together with a great war cry.
Not such is the roaring against dry land of the sea's surf
as it rolls in from the open under the hard blast of the north wind;
not such is the bellowing of fire in its blazing
in the deep places of the hills when it rises inflaming the forest,
nor such again the crying voice of the wind in the deep-haired
oaks, when it roars highest in its fury against them,
not so loud as now the noise of Achaians and Trojans
in voice of terror rose as they drove against one another.
First glorious Hektor made a cast with his spear at Aias
since he had turned straight against him, nor missed with his throw
but struck, there where over his chest were crossed the two straps,
one for the sword with the silver nails, and one for the great shield.
These guarded the tenderness of his skin. And Hektor, in anger
because his weapon had been loosed from his hand in a vain cast,
to avoid death shrank into the host of his own companions.
But as he drew away huge Telamonian Aias
caught up a rock; there were many, holding-stones for the fast ships,
rolled among the feet of the fighters; he caught up one of these
and hit him in the chest next the throat over his shield rim,
and spun him around like a top with the stroke, so that he staggered
in a circle; as a great oak goes down root-torn under
Zeus father's stroke, and a horrible smell of sulphur uprises
from it, and there is no courage left in a man who stands by
and looks on, for the thunderstroke of great Zeus is a hard thing;
so Hektor in all his strength dropped suddenly in the dust, let
fall the spear from his hand, and his shield was beaten upon him,
and the helm, and his armour elaborate with bronze clashed over him.
Screaming aloud the sons of the Achaians ran forward
in hope to drag him away, and threw their volleying javelins
against him, yet no man could stab or cast at the shepherd
of the people; sooner the Trojans' bravest gathered about him,
Aineias, and Poulydamas, and brilliant Agenor,
Sarpedon, lord of the Lykians, and Glaukos the blameless;
and of the rest no man was heedless of him, but rather
sloped the strong circles of their shields over him, while his companions
caught him in their arms out of the fighting and reached his fast-footed
horses, where they stood to the rear of the fighting and the battle
holding their charioteer and the elaborate chariot,
and these carried him, groaning heavily, back toward the city.
But when they came to the crossing place of the fair-running river,
of whirling Xanthos, whose father was Zeus the immortal,
they moved him from behind his horses to the ground, and splashed
water over him. He got his wind again, and his eyes cleared,
and he got up to lean on one knee and vomit a dark clot
of blood, then lay back on the ground again, while over both eyes
dark night misted. His strength was still broken by the stone's stroke.
But the Argives, when they saw Hektor withdrawing from them,
remembered once again their warcraft and turned on the Trojans.
There far before them all swift Aias son of Oïleus
made an outrush, and stabbed with the sharp spear Satnios,
Enops' son, whom the perfect naiad nymph had borne once
to Enops, as he tended his herds by Satnioeis river.
The spear-famed son of Oïleus, coming close to this man,
stabbed him in the flank so that he knocked him backward, and over him
Trojans and Danaans closed together in strong encounter.
Poulydamas of the shaken spear came up to stand by him,
Panthoös'son, and struck in the right shoulder Prothoënor
son of Areïlykos, and the powerful spear was driven
through the shoulder, and he dropping in the dust clawed the ground in his fingers.
Poulydamas vaunted terribly over him, calling in a great voice: