So speaking she pushed Sthenelos to the ground from the chariot,
driving him back with her hand, and he leapt away from it lightly,
and she herself, a goddess in her anger, stepped into the chariot
beside brilliant Diomedes, and the oaken axle groaned aloud
under the weight, carrying a dread goddess and a great man.
Pallas Athene then took up the whip and the reins, steering
first of all straight on against Ares the single-foot horses.
Ares was in the act of stripping gigantic Periphas,
shining son of Ochesios, far the best of the men of Aitolia.
Blood-stained Ares was in the act of stripping him. But Athene
put on the helm of Death, that stark Ares might not discern her.
Now as manslaughtering Ares caught sight of Diomedes
the brilliant, he let gigantic Periphas lie in the place where
he had first cut him down and taken the life away from him,
and made straight against Diomedes, breaker of horses.
Now as they in their advance had come close together,
Ares lunged first over the yoke and the reins of his horses
with the bronze spear, furious to take the life from him.
But the goddess grey-eyed Athene in her hand catching
the spear pushed it away from the car, so he missed and stabbed vainly.
After him Diomedes of the great war cry drove forward
with the bronze spear; and Pallas Athene, leaning in on it,
drove it into the depth of the belly where the war belt girt him.
Picking this place she stabbed and driving it deep in the fair flesh
wrenched the spear out again. Then Ares the brazen bellowed
with a sound as great as nine thousand men make, or ten thousand,
when they cry as they carry into the fighting the fury of the war god.
And a shivering seized hold alike on Achaians and Trojans
in their fear at the bellowing of battle-insatiate Ares.
As when out of the thunderhead the air shows darkening
after a day's heat when the stormy wind uprises,
thus to Tydeus' son Diomedes Ares the brazen
showed as he went up with the clouds into the wide heaven.
Lightly he came to the gods' citadel, headlong Olympos,
and sat down beside Kronian Zeus, grieving in his spirit,
and showed him the immortal blood dripping from the spear cut.
So in sorrow for himself he addressed him in winged words: